Complete language support to all GUI tabs (#873)
openstudiocoalition/OpenStudioApplication: translations/TRANSLATION_WORKFLOW.md

# OpenStudio Application — Translation Workflow

This document describes the full pipeline for adding or updating translations in

> `OpenStudioApp_<lang>.ts` files.

Reviewer: Is `translate_new_languages.py` missing?

Author: translate_new_languages.py was a one-off bootstrap script for the 4 new languages; those are now fully covered by translate_all_languages.py which handles all 18. Left it out as redundant.

Reviewer: What about if we want to add a new language?

Author: Added an **Adding a new language** section to TRANSLATION_WORKFLOW.md covering the five steps: add the `.ts` entry and post-build copy commands to `translations/CMakeLists.txt`, add the locale to the `LANGUAGES` dict in `translate_all_languages.py`, then run the standard lupdate → fix_and_unvanish → translate_all_languages → fix_and_unvanish → lrelease pipeline. lupdate creates the `.ts` file automatically on the first run.

Commits: f6642ba7 (TRANSLATION_WORKFLOW.md "Adding a new language" section), 3bce8c57 (translation helper scripts), d3b7090f (adds `add_language_to_menu.py` to automate the five C++ touch points when wiring a new language into the menu).

> # OpenStudio Application — Translation Workflow
> 
> This document describes the full pipeline for adding or updating translations in
> `OpenStudioApp_<lang>.ts` files.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# OpenStudio Application — Translation Workflow

This document describes the full pipeline for adding or updating translations in
`OpenStudioApp_<lang>.ts` files via AI.

**NOTE:** The preferred way is still to use a bilingual user do the translations themselves using Qt Linguist. Please refer to the Wiki [Internationalization: Translating the OpenStudioApplication to another target language](https://github.com/openstudiocoalition/OpenStudioApplication/wiki/Internationalization:-Translating-the-OpenStudioApplication-to-another-target-language)
```

Author: Done in b70dc875 — added a callout block at the top of the doc noting this covers the AI-assisted pipeline and linking to the wiki for the preferred human-translation (Qt Linguist) workflow.

---

## Quick-reference pipeline

```
cmake --build . --target OpenStudioApplication_lupdate

> python fix_and_unvanish.py

Reviewer: I don't see `translate_all_languages.py` or `fix_and_unvanish.py`

Author: Added all six helper scripts in 3bce8c57: fix_and_unvanish.py, translate_all_languages.py, retranslate_stubborn.py, recover_batches.py, add_idd_skeleton.py, and translate_skeleton.py.

```bash
python fix_and_unvanish.py
```

### 5. Validate with lrelease

```bash
cmake --build . --target OpenStudioApplication_lrelease
```

Any XML parse error (e.g. unescaped `&` in an accelerator mnemonic like
`종료(&E)` instead of `종료(&amp;E)`) will surface here. Fix and re-run.

### 6. Rebuild

```bash
cmake --build . --config Release
```

---

## Supported languages (18)

| Code | Language |
|------|----------|
| `ar` | Arabic |
| `ca` | Catalan |
| `de` | German |
| `el` | Greek |
| `es` | Spanish |
| `fa` | Persian / Farsi |
| `fr` | French |
| `he` | Hebrew |
| `hi` | Hindi |
| `id` | Indonesian |
| `it` | Italian |
| `ja` | Japanese |
| `ko` | Korean |
| `pl` | Polish |
| `pt` | Portuguese |
| `tr` | Turkish |
| `vi` | Vietnamese |
| `zh_CN` | Simplified Chinese |

---

## Helper scripts (repo root)

| Script | Purpose |
|--------|---------|
| `fix_and_unvanish.py` | Un-vanish translated entries; promote finished unfinished entries |
| `translate_all_languages.py` | Batch-translate new strings into all 17 non-Spanish languages via Claude API |
| `retranslate_stubborn.py` | Re-translate any entries that came back empty from the batch run |

> | `recover_batches.py` | Re-poll known batch IDs after a network failure |

Reviewer: These two are also missing?

Author: Added in 3bce8c57 along with the others.
